
Two key international actors, Médecins sans Frontières (MSF, or Doctors without Borders) and the World Health Organization (WHO), are testing an Ebola vaccine during the current outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), in collaboration with the ministry of health (see map). They must act in a state of extreme uncertainty: the situation is evolving by the hour, information is hard to come by, and the ethical dilemmas and practical hurdles are abundant. And they are using slightly different approaches.

“There are all these practical things,” Rebecca Grais says, “and you have the collision of all these different worlds at the same time: the humanitarian world, the research world, the North–South, different populations and languages.” Grais is the director of research at the MSF Epicenter in Paris, an organization created in 1986 to provide epidemiologic expertise to support MSF operations. I am meeting with her on May 17 — 9 days after the WHO was notified of two laboratory-confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease in the Équateur province of the DRC. People run in and out of her office, exchanging information and getting ready to travel to the DRC as quickly as possible. They will be leaving in a couple of days to study the effects of the rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP Ebola vaccine (Merck) in real time during an outbreak. The vaccine’s safety and efficacy were very promising when it was studied in Guinea and Sierra Leone in 2015,1 but the research was conducted at the tail end of the epidemic, so it was not clear how much of the reduction in transmission could be attributed to the vaccine and how much simply to the waning of the epidemic. Further investigation is needed to determine how the vaccine will work as this outbreak unfolds in a different country and setting.

As Grais thinks about her upcoming journey, an envelope full of cash lands on her desk: you can’t swipe your credit card in Bikoro, the epicenter of the outbreak, where there isn’t even running water. But although the travel will not be easy, in many ways the outbreak may offer the best scenario for learning more about the vaccine. The DRC has had — and has controlled — multiple Ebola outbreaks. The country has experienced public health teams and has had excellent collaborations with MSF and other international organizations for many years. The collaborators should be able to implement their plans, but some things are different this year that make doing so more challenging.

Équateur is different from other parts of the DRC. Forty percent of its population is Twa, an African Pygmy group that lives interdependently with agricultural Bantu-speaking populations, providing them with game in exchange for farm products. The Twa population is already marginalized and vulnerable, and the research effort will face many issues related to language and culture, beginning with understanding and communicating perceptions of risk, vaccination, and treatment.

Grais notes that in addition to the rural outbreaks, “the other thing that makes this different is that there have been cases in Mbandaka, the capital of the Équateur province, with a population of about a million and connections to Kinshasa [the capital of DRC]. This changes the degree of difficulty.”

Yet the ministry of health, MSF, and the Epicenter team started preparing for such an effort before the last DRC epidemic in the spring of 2017: they wrote protocols and submitted them to the national health authorities in DRC, worked closely and trained with the ministry of health, discussed and modified the plans to be sure the people involved on the ground understood and agreed to them. “The protocol isn’t the part that is complicated here,” Grais says. “The hard part is how do you make a series of quick judgment calls on the spot, keeping in mind the fact that you are a visitor and you want this information to be shared. That is the part that is tough.”

It is, of course, impossible to run a randomized, placebo-controlled trial now. So MSF is running an open-label, single-group study to provide additional information on the vaccine’s safety and effectiveness. Everybody who consents to take part will be included, and participants will be followed for at least 42 days (twice what is often considered to be the maximum incubation period of Ebola virus disease), whether or not they choose to be vaccinated. The plan is to include 500 people in the trial and to start as soon as possible after the teams are on the ground in the DRC.

Peter Salama, WHO deputy director-general for emergency preparedness and response, speaks with me from his office in Geneva on May 19, a day after a WHO emergency committee decided that the DRC situation did not yet meet the criteria to be declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. “But it is close,” Salama says, “and the group can reconvene on short notice.”

WHO teams will start using the Ebola vaccine in the DRC on May 21, Salama tells me: the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE) on Immunization recommended in April 2017 that “the rVSVΔG-ZEBOV-GP vaccine be promptly deployed under the Expanded Access framework, with informed consent and in compliance with Good Clinical Practice” if an Ebola disease outbreak “occurred before the candidate vaccine is licensed.”2

Since the vaccine is not yet licensed, this is the only way to use it, according to Salama. One of the advantages is that liability is covered by the WHO. But the WHO approach differs in some details from the research approach MSF described to me 2 days earlier. Early or expanded access programs (EAPs), also called compassionate use programs, are in place to provide access to medicinal products that have not yet received regulatory approval. In a clinical trial setting, the primary intent is research, whereas in an EAP the intent is treatment. Such a program is therefore usually managed differently from a clinical trial in terms of both documentation and approval processes. But both MSF and the WHO are eager to see research integrated into the operational responses, because, as Salama says, “otherwise we simply will never learn” what the best approach is.

Salama believes the greatest challenges and risks involved in deploying the new vaccine are related to communication and logistics. “The communication has to be handled very carefully, since we are bringing in vaccine, but it is only going to very specific people,” he says. “It is extremely important to get that right.” And getting the logistics right is even harder. The Équateur province is in the middle of one of the densest forests on the planet, with no roads except some tracks that are passable only by motorcycle. It takes a huge logistical effort just to get people and equipment there, not to mention a vaccine that needs to be stored at −60 to −80°C.

Close collaboration with the local government and mutual trust are other keys to success. Salama explains how essential it is that Oly Ilunga Kalenga, the DRC minister of health, is hands-on, engaged, effective, and very committed. “He was at the airport texting me at midnight 2 nights ago because he wanted to make sure he would personally go and receive the vaccine that we flew from Geneva to Kinshasa, to make sure it didn’t get stopped in customs clearance processes and could be taken straight to the cold chain,” Salama says. “It is a very delicate vaccine, and he didn’t want anything to happen to it. He personally met the vaccine at the airport and cleared it through customs — at a very odd hour of the night. It is that level of commitment that it takes. And we don’t often see that type of commitment anywhere around the world.”

Conducting research alongside response is completely different from the usual setup of a research institution, Grais points out near the end of our conversation. It’s not necessarily more complicated — you just need to know how to do it. “When people say it is really hard — just look at these roads! — I think: this is Congo,” she says. “This is only difficult if this is not what you do every day. Sometimes even in terms of making compromises, that’s often used as an excuse: Oh well, the conflict is difficult, so we didn’t do that. But I would make the counterargument, which is that you are dealing with the most vulnerable, so if anything, your degree of rigor must be very high.”